---
title: "Family History Guide"
summary: "An overview of the process I've used to conduct research into family history."
date: 2022-07-27T20:50:29+12:00
draft: false
hideMeta: true
ShowTOC: true
TocOpen: true
---
I started looking into my family history in 2019 and have found it to be a fascinating hobby. I've been blown away by how much there is to find out about my ancestors and the lives they led. It turns out they have left behind a wealth of records and artifacts, and much of this material has been digitised by government agencies. Below I've outlined the general process I use to uncover facts about my family history. I've tried to be as specific as possible and give practical advice and tips. 

## 1. Understand family history research

Researching family history typically involves searching for sources which contain evidence used to support or refute certain facts.

**Facts:** Something which is known to have happened relating to your family history. It could be a birth, a marriage, an occupation, an emigration, or a place of residence.  
**Evidence:** Information used to evaluate claims or questions about family history. This may be direct evidence (a date of birth on birth certificate), indirect evidence (a death record or census record implying year of birth), or negative evidence (a record not appearing where it is expected implying emigration).  
**Sources:** Records containing information relevant to family history. Examples include everything from an interview with a relative, to a birth certificate, to a digitised newspaper article or obituary.  

## 2. Start with what you know

Record the people and events you know about (and if you aren't sure then indicate this, don't guess). Find the sources you already have and record the information on these. 
   
## 3. Talk to your relatives

Your next port of call should be your living relatives. Ask them about members of your family and record as much information as possible. Again, indicate if any details are uncertain as this might help in future. 

Focus on direct ancestors first - the couples who form each node of your family tree. Key information includes:
- Full birth names (including middle names and nicknames)
- Key dates such as births, marriages, deaths, migrations
- Rough locations where these events may have taken place. 

## 4. Organise your research

One of the most important things to do during your research is to record all the relevant details associated with your sources. Sources are the records containing evidence that you are relying on to support or refute certain facts. You need to record all the relevant metadata associated with the source, and different types of sources will have different metadata fields. 

For example, a digitised newspaper obituary on Papers Past contains the following metadata:
- The section of the newspaper (eg "Obituary")
- The name of the newspaper (eg "The Manawatu Standard")
- The volume and issue numbers (eg "Volume 100, Issue 100")
- The date the newspaper was published (eg "1 January 1900")
- The page number (eg "Page 1")
- The publisher of the record or repository in which you found it (eg "Papers Past, The National Library of New Zealand")
- And the URL or web address of the page containing this item (eg https://paperspast.natlib.govt.nz/newspapers/MS1900100100.1.100)

This information will allow you to *cite* this source properly when stating a fact which it supports. For example, if you're writing a report or printing a family tree generated by family tree software, each fact should have a corresponding citation which points to the source in the bibliography. An example would look like this:

David SMITH died on 1 January 1900<sup>1</sup>

Notes  
<sup>1</sup> Obituary, The Manawatu Standard, Volume 100, Issue 100, page 1 (1 January 1900). Papers Past, The National Library of New Zealand: https://paperspast.natlib.govt.nz/newspapers/MS19320304.2.75  


You won't need to include every piece of metadata in your citations or bibliographies, but it's still best to record everything you can so you don't need to come back and repeat your work later on. There are many ways of styling your citations or bibliographies, but the important thing is to pick a style and be consistent.

### Organsising your research with software

The need to structure your family history as a branching tree, along with the need to store lots of information associated with sources, and cite these using a consistent style, are some of the compelling reasons to use genealogical software.

I use [RootsMagic](https://www.rootsmagic.com/) which is genealogical software developed by a company in the United States. It costs US$40 as a one-off payment. I chose RM because it has a fairly long history, is actively developed, has a good forum with an active community, contained all the features I was looking for, and was sold for a one-off payment rather than an ongoing subscription. I deliberately chose an "offline" option over an online tree service, as these tend to be subscription-based (or they monetise your data), and I wanted the security of working on my local machine only. I also chose not to subscribe to Ancestry.com, for similar reasons, although this seems to be a popular option. There are other good family tree programs out there, and some are free. 

Each family tree program has its own quirks and is designed to be used in a certain way. Rootsmagic is no exception. When deciding on software, take a look to see how thorough the documentation or user manual is. Rootsmagic provides good documentation and video guides. While basic tasks can be picked up pretty quickly, it will take you a long time to understand all of the features offered by your family tree program, and probably even longer still to understand how to incorporate these features into your workflow (the basic steps you follow when researching and assembling family tree information).

## 5. Search civil records first

### [Births, Marriages & Deaths Online](https://www.bdmhistoricalrecords.dia.govt.nz/)

Use this database to find official government records relating to:

- Births that occurred at least 100 years ago
- Stillbirths that occurred at least 50 years ago
- Marriages that occurred 80 years ago
- Deaths that occurred at least 50 years ago or the deceased's date of birth was at least 80 years ago.

Start by selecting the type of record you're looking for. For each record type, you must enter either:
- A Family Name AND Search From Date; OR
- A registration number in the form YYYY/XXXXXX where Y refers to year and X the record number for that year (which you will not have until you find the record)

It's normally best to start with only a family name and an approximate date range. The results will not show the exact date of the record. However, because you can enter a date range beginning with a Search From Date and ending with a Search To Date, it's possible to narrow down the dates until you have an exact date for the record. 

Birth certificates usually include the names of the parents, so record this information and use it to work backwards.

### [Archives New Zealand Collections Search](https://collections.archives.govt.nz)

Archives New Zealand contains a wide variety of records that are extremely valuable for conducting family history research. First, use Collections Search to find probates. Probates are official records of how a person's estate was administered after their death. If the deceased person's will was submitted to the courts then it will be included in the probate record. This makes probates an extremely valuable source of information for the family historian for several reasons:

- Wills and probates contain official information about a person such as their legal name, date of birth, and date of death.
- They usually also contain interesting facts about a person such as their place of residence and occupation.
- Where a deceased person appoints their next of kin as executor of their will, the will and probate will often contain valuable information about them too.
- Wills are a good source for confirming the names and relationships of family members who are allocated assets.

Probates can be searched directly through Collections Search or the [FamilySearch](https://www.familysearch.org/search/collection/1865481) collection, which is where Archives NZ ultimately [plans](https://www.archives.govt.nz/research-guidance/research-guides/identity/searching-digitised-probates) to upload all probates over 50 years old.




